Updates for capgen-v1 (#81)
NCAR/ccpp-doc: CCPPtechnical/source/AutoGenPhysCaps.rst

The CCPP *capgen* script discussed in :numref:`Chapter %s <ConfigBuildOptions>`
generates the :term:`caps <physics cap>` that connect the physics schemes to the CCPP Framework.
This chapter describes the :term:`suite<Physics Suite cap>` and :term:`group caps<Group cap>`,
while the host model *caps* are described in :numref:`Chapter %s <Host-side Coding>`.
These *caps* autogenerated by ``ccpp_capgen.py`` reside in the directory
defined by the ``CAPS_DIR`` variable (see example in :ref:`Listing 8.1 <ccpp_capgen_example>`).

==========================
Overview
==========================

When CCPP is built, the CCPP Framework and physics are statically linked to the executable. This allows the best
performance and efficient memory use. This build requires metadata provided
by the host model and variables requested from the physics scheme. Only the variables required for
the specified suites are kept, requiring one or more :term:`SDF`\ s (see left side of :numref:`Figure %s <ccpp_static_build>`)
as arguments to the ``ccpp_capgen.py`` script.
The CCPP *capgen* step performs the tasks below.

> * Parse Scheme and Host metadata and source files, validate all variable connections.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Parse scheme and host metadata and source files, validate all variable connections.
```

* Filter unused schemes and variables.
* Create *caps* for groups and suite(s).
* Create Host *caps*
* Create CCPP *datatable*.

After invoking the *capgen* step, the following files will be available:

.. code-block:: console

  ccpp_kinds.F90               — Kind parameter definitions
  <host>_ccpp_cap.F90          — Static dispatch API (per-host; filename and module name derived from ``--host-name``)
  ccpp_<suite>_cap.F90         — Suite-level cap (state machine, group dispatch)
  ccpp_<suite>_<group>_cap.F90 — Group-level cap (scheme call sites)
  ccpp_<suite>_data.F90        — Suite-owned interstitial data module
  ccpp_<suite>_types.F90       — Shared types (pointer wrappers, temp locals)

>   ccpp_<suite>.meta            — Generated suite metadata (for inspection)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ccpp_<suite>_data.meta            — Generated suite metadata (for inspection)
```
... I believe ...

Author: You are correct. 
Can you [apply this change in ccpp_capgen.py](https://github.com/NCAR/ccpp-framework/blob/feature/capgen-v1/capgen/ccpp_capgen.py#L16)?

  datatable.xml                — Generator database for ``ccpp_datafile.py``

*Listing 5.1: Autogenerated files from capgen.*

``<host>_ccpp_cap.F90`` is an interface, which contains subroutines ``ccpp_register``, ``ccpp_init``, ``ccpp_physics_init``,
``ccpp_physics_timestep_init``, ``ccpp_physics_run``, ``ccpp_physics_timestep_final``, and ``ccpp_physics_final``.
Each subroutine uses a ``suite_name`` and an optional argument, ``group_name``, to call the groups
of a specified suite (e.g., ``fast_physics``, ``physics``, ``time_vary``, ``radiation``, ``stochastic``, etc.),
or to call the entire suite. 

.. _AutomaticVariableConversions:

==========================
Automatic variable conversions
==========================

The CCPP framework is capable of performing automatic unit conversions if a mismatch of
units between the host model and a physics scheme is detected, provided that the required
unit conversion has been implemented. Similarly, the framework can also perform type conversions 

> between host and scheme variables.

Reviewer: There's also vertical flipping - need to discuss the necessary metadata attribute

Author: Described in https://ccpp-techdoc--81.org.readthedocs.build/en/81/CompliantPhysicsParams.html#ccpp-arg-table

If a mismatch of units is detected and an automatic unit conversion can be performed,
the CCPP capgen script will document this with a log message as in the following example:

.. code-block:: console

>    DJS: THERE ARE NO MESSAGES MADE BY CAPGEN WHEN REGISTERING VARIABLE CONVERSION.

Reviewer: that's now addressed in feature/capgen-v1

       re_cloudsnow = real(re_cloudsnow_1,type=kind_phys)
    end subroutine phys_GROUP_run
    ...
  end module ccpp_SUITE_GROUP_cap

*Listing 5.3: Suite cap code demonstrating variable transformations required by subroutine* ``mp_tempo_run``.

If a required unit conversion has not been implemented the CCPP capgen script will generate an error message as follows:

.. code-block:: console

      Variable 'prsl' (standard_name='air_pressure'): host units 'Pa' differ from scheme 'mp_tempo' units 'PaPaPa' but no unit conversion is known; add a conversion to metadata/unit_conversion.py or fix the metadata

All automatic unit conversions are implemented in ``ccpp-framework/capgen/metadata/unit_conversion.py``,
new unit conversions can be added to this file by following the existing examples.

.. _SuiteVariables:

==========================
Suite Variables
==========================

The CCPP framework will manage the memory (e.g., define and allocate) variables which are only needed within the physics. These are referred to as **suite variables** and are created if certain conditions are met:

* Variable is not defined in host metadata

> * One scheme has a variable defined with ``intent(inout)`` or ``intent(out)``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The first scheme using the variable defines it as ``intent(out)``
```

Reviewer: We should probably add the sequence for determining the "first" use is
```
loop outer over phases: physics_init, physics_timestep_init, physics_run, physics_timestep_final, physics_final
  loop inner over schemes in the order they appear in the SDF - this doesn't (and cannot, how could it) work if the variable is used in different groups and the host model manually calls them in a different order than the SDF - but with the correct compiler flags (init everything to NaN and check for FPEs) it will be caught at runtime
end loop outer
```

> * Another scheme has the same variable defined with ``intent(in)``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Another scheme has the same variable defined with ``intent(in)`` or ``intent(inout)``
```

.. code-block:: fortran

  module ccpp_SUITE_GROUP_cap
    use ccpp_SUITE_data, only: ccpp_suite_data
    ...
  contains
    subroutine phys_GROUP_run(lb, ub, ..., errmsg, errflg)
       ...
       ! ccpp_suite_data(1)%re_cloud has intent(out)
       call mp_tempo_run(re_cloud=ccpp_suite_data(1)%re_cloud(lb:ub,:), ..., errmsg=errmsg, errflg=errflg)
       ...
       ! ccpp_suite_data(1)%re_cloud has intent(in)
       call rrtmgp_sw_run(re_cloud=ccpp_suite_data(1)%re_cloud(lb:ub,:), ..., errmsg=errmsg, errflg=errflg)        ...
    end subroutine phys_GROUP_run
    ...
  end module ccpp_SUITE_GROUP_cap

*Listing 5.6: In this example, the variable* ``re_cloud`` *was added to the suite data module. All variables in the suite data module are allocated (deallocated) during the suite initialization (finalization) step.*

**NOTE: Suite variables are ephemeral and not available outside of the physics.** If you need to save fields for subsequent time steps, or for coupling outside the physics, the variable should be managed by the host.

.. _OptionalVariables:

==========================
Optional Scheme variables
==========================

> For scheme's with optional arguments, the CCPP framework will generate local pointers in the Group cap. These local pointers are associated within the group cap, just prior to calling the scheme. This association is only done if the ``active`` condition set in the host model metadata is satisfied (see :numref:`Section %s <ActiveAttribute>`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For scheme's with optional arguments, the CCPP framework will generate local pointers in the group cap. These local pointers are associated within the group cap, just prior to calling the scheme. This association is only done if the ``active`` condition set in the host model metadata is satisfied (see :numref:`Section %s <ActiveAttribute>`).
```

.. code-block:: fortran

  module ccpp_SUITE_GROUP_cap
    use ccpp_SUITE_types, only: real_kind_phys_rank1_ptr_type
    ...
  contains
    subroutine phys_GROUP_run(lb, ub, ..., errmsg, errflg)
      ...
      type(real_kind_phys_rank1_ptr_type) :: nwfa2d_p
      ...
      if ((do_tempo) .and. (ltaerosol .or. mraerosol)) then
        nwfa2d_p%ptr => nwfa2d(lb:ub)
      else
        nullify(nwfa2d_p%ptr)
      end if
      ! re_cloud is optional in mp_tempo_run
      call mp_tempo_run(nwfa2d=nwfa2d_p%ptr, ..., errmsg=errmsg, errflg=errflg)
      ...
    end subroutine phys_GROUP_run
    ...
  end module ccpp_SUITE_GROUP_cap

.. _SuiteData:

==========================
Suite Data
==========================

For organizational reasons, and to keep the autogenerated *suite caps* lean, the framework will generate the following infrastructure referenced by the caps. 

> * Suite Type Module   - Type declaration for pointers required by optional scheme arguments (see :numref:`Section %s <OptionalVariables>`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Suite Type Module   - Type declaration for pointers and local variables required by optional scheme arguments and/or variable transformations.
```

* Suite Data Module   - Declaration of any suite variable (see :numref:`Section %s <SuiteVariables>`).

> These modules are imported directly into the *suite cap*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These modules are imported directly into the *group cap*.
```

Reviewer: possible ALSO group cap if needed in the suite-register, suite-init, or suite-final schemes.

.. code-block:: fortran

  module ccpp_SUITE_data
    ...
    type, public :: ccpp_SUITE_data_t
      real(kind=kind_phys), allocatable :: re_cloud(:,:)
    end type ccpp_SUITE_data_t

>     type(ccpp_SUITE_data_t), allocatable, target, public :: ccpp_suite_data(:)

Reviewer: Might be good to mention that the ccpp_suite_data object is dimensioned by the number of instances (is this discussed anywhere in the updated docs? haven't gotten that far yet) and that ccpp_suite_data is allocated in the ccpp_register phase. You can refer to a later section about multi-instance and multi-threading support that I can write if it doesn't exist yet.

Author: I haven't added anything on the multi-instances...
Maybe the multi instance topic might deserve its own section in this chapter?
